Trader who inspired The Big Short sets off AI tech share sell-off Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News Israel-Gaza War War in Ukraine US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business Executive Lounge Technology of Business Future of Business Innovation Technology Science & Health Artificial Intelligence AI v the Mind Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList To the Ends of The Earth Earth Natural Wonders Weather & Science Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcast Categories Radio Audio FAQs Video BBC Maestro Live Live News Live Sport Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Trader who inspired The Big Short bets against AI as tech shares fall 4 days ago Share Save Osmond Chia Business reporter Share Save Getty Images Hedge fund investor Michael Burry, who was the inspiration for the film The Big Short, has bet against Nvidia and Palantir shares Shares of major technology companies have fallen over fears about the valuations of firms linked to the artificial intelligence (AI) industry. Investors have grown increasing wary about what they are calling an "AI bubble" this year that has seen tech stock valuations hit record highs. Major indexes in Asia were the hardest hit on Wednesday, following a sell-off in the US. Japan's Nikkei 225 closed 2.5%, dragged lower by tech investment giant, SoftBank, which plunged more than 10%. AI valuation concerns took hold in the US as well after it was revealed the trader who inspired The Big Short has bet $1.1bn (£840m) on a fall in prices for AI-related stocks Nvidia and Palantir. Hedge fund investor Michael Burry, who was played by actor Christian Bale in the 2015 film The Big Short, a film about traders who made millions from predicting the collapse of the US housing bubble in 2008, has turned his attention to AI. Mr Burry's company revealed it has bought financial products, called options, that will pay out if the price of AI-linked companies Nvidia and Palatir shares fall. It comes after the trader posted on X: "Sometimes, we see bubbles. Sometimes, there is something to do about it. Sometimes, the only winning move is not to play." Markets worldwide have climbed in over the year as investors placed their chips in companies linked to AI, including Nvidia, Intel and AMD. "It seems fatigue over AI and the current earnings run has investors questioning the sustainability of the AI hype. That's dragged down AI companies overnight in markets," said financial analyst Farhan Badami. Many jumps in tech shares have been linked to major investments in firms. For instance, Amazon shares hit an all-time high on Monday after the announcement of a $38bn deal with OpenAI . But the shares of many tech firms fell on Wednesday. Amazon's stock dipped by 1.84% and notably, Nvidia - recently the first company to ever be valued at $5tn - dropped by close to 4%. SoftBank, one of Japan's largest firms, suffered one of steepest drop in shares. The fall weighed especially hard on Japan's Nikkei index. The investment firm has invested heavily in AI development, channelling billions into tech companies like OpenAI, Intel and other players in the sector. SoftBank's decline stems from the recent "sharp rally" in its shares, which investment analyst Vincent Fernando describes as a "double-edged sword". The surge can attract investors, but also leaves the stock vulnerable to pullbacks whenever market sentiments shift, he said. "The market can worry if the company is overspending on AI and won't make a sufficient return on that spend," said Mr Fernando from investment consultancy Zero One. Tech shares also took a hit elsewhere in Asia. South Korea's Samsung fell by more than 4% while the country's stock exchange index, the Kospi, was down by 2.85%. TSMC, which makes semiconductors for Nvidia, was fell nearly 3%. Mr Badami from financial services firm eToro believes the correction among tech stocks will continue over the next year. "Investors seem to be feeling that some of the super-high valuations out there aren't making sense, and AI enthusiasm has definitely fuelled those stretched valuations." Spending within AI-focused tech firms has been "really high, and for some companies, they are not making enough money to justify the spending," said Mr Badami. Tech giants are spending big on AI in rush to dominate the boom Is the AI boom a bubble? The AI job cuts are here - or are they? International Business Artificial intelligence Related Texas sues Roblox for 'putting paedophiles and profits' over safety Fire-blocking chemicals promise safer buildings Eastern Airways goes into administration More from the BBC 1 day ago 'A predator in your home': Mothers say chatbots encouraged their sons to kill themselves In her first UK interview Megan Garcia speaks to Laura Kuenssberg about the death of her teenage son. 1 day ago 2 days ago Why tech giants are offering premium AI tools to millions of Indians for free Experts say India’s vast, diverse and young user base makes it a key market for global AI expansion. 2 days ago 3 days ago I wanted ChatGPT to help me. So why did it advise me how to kill myself? ChatGPT wrote a woman a suicide note and another AI chatbot role-played sexual acts with children, BBC finds. 3 days ago 4 days ago Plans lodged for AI factory of 'national importance' Plans said the proposal would address an "urgent need" for sovereign AI capacity. 4 days ago 4 days ago Will quantum be bigger than AI? The highly complex technology is increasingly being tipped to transform computing. 4 days ago British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Innovation Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages Follow BBC on: Terms of Use Subscription Terms About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us Do not share or sell my info BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index Copyright 2025 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.